---
layout: post
title: Why you won't be reading this on Medium
date: 2016-08-21 09:00
tags: [purpose, publishing, platforms]
permalink: /medium/
---
My writing is not on Medium. I built this website using a heavily-modified Jekyll template and am hosting it on Github pages. There are no analytics or tracking cookies. 

This set of choices is by no means the most obvious or sensible for someone who wants to start writing publicly on the web in 2016. For most people, Medium would probably be their first choice. Other alternatives include Wordpress, Tumblr, posting directly on LinkedIn or Facebook, or using a service like Squarespace or Wix to build their site.

I considered all of those options, and chose none of them in the end. Some of the reasons for that are personal &mdash; they have to do with what I wanted this blog to be for. But others, I would argue, relate to common questions that any independent content producer should be asking themselves in an age of increasingly powerful web platforms.  

##What's it for?

For you, dear reader, I'm hoping this is a space to find out more about who I am, what I do professionally, and the thinking behind my views on some journalism and digital media issues. 

You might be standing at the crossroads of journalism and technology, and have come here to find inspiration. Or, at least, a better understanding of the challanges and opportunities facing those who are tackling similar issues. You might even, unexpectedly, be entertained. 

For me, this blog is a space for rumination. It is my calling card; an extended *curriculum vitae*. It tells the world what I stand for and what interests me professionally, and allows me to use as much (or as little) space as I need to explain my thoughts and ideas.

It is also a bridge connecting me back to the work I did and the skills I learnt while on the FT's interactive desk. It is where 

- I could practice (and make mistakes) freely
- I would be reminded of what it means to be fiddling around with code and figuring out solutions
- I would have to make meaningful design chocies on something that matters deeply to me, and
- I would not have the help of a professional developer or designer to fall back on

##What? More questions?  

Yeah. Having established what I wanted this site to be for, I then asked myself a series of questions to help me decide where and how to publish my blog. 

###How much does reach matter to me?
Not a lot. I would of course prefer to have more readers rather than fewer, but I also have inward-facing reasons for starting this blog that can be satisfied even if I have no readers at all.   

I am also aware that my writing addresses an audience with very particular interests:  digital journalism/news nerds, and those interested organisational change. I therefore care much more about specifically reaching those people than getting a bigger overall audience. 

### What investment am I prepared to make?
I was prepared to put in a significant initial effort to explore my options, determine my best choice, formulate a plan, and to set up the site. But after that, I wanted posting new content to be easy and maintenance to be very low, because I wanted the bulk of my ongoing time investment to be spent on writing. 

### How much does freedom of choice and customisation matter to me?
A lot. This is as much about [expressing my self identity](https://design.blog/2016/08/17/alice-rawsthorn-on-design-and-choice/) and conveying what is unique and different about me, as it is about transferring information to the reader.   

### How much does ownership and control over the material matter to me? 
Quite a lot. I'm spending time and using my expertise and experience to write these posts. The site, as a whole, is a tangible expression of my intangible assets (skills and knowledge I picked up through self-learning or other informal education). Ownership and control therefore matter because I want to be able to choose to be generous with it.   

### Can I separate how I publish my work from how I distribute and promote it?





### If I collect analytics data, what am I actually going to do it?



### Is there *any* reason why my homepage, or any indvidiual post, should be bigger than major works of Russian literature in terms of file size?

### What do I want my default choices to be?




Ethical/principled objections to medium

What's it for?

- an extended CV
- I might want to collate the material I use into a book at some point
- I value the content I produce and seek to retain control over it

does it mean i don't do anything off this site? not at all. I write for other outlets / syndicate this content for free to others. I post fragments onto other platforms: FB and LinkedIn
The difference is that each of those decisions are consciously made. the default is not a total relinquishing of control that I would then have to claw back if I wanted to later on

I value your data plan: this is not a very visual site because my skills are in producing words, not creating original art or illustration. It doesn't have a lot of photography because I discuss mainly abstract concepts. I'd like to think this site passes the taft test

It has no tracking/analytics.  it is pure html and css. There isn't even javascript.
This is not just becuase of a lack of technical capability on my part, or some luddite, head-in-the-sand impulse to not look at analytics.  

