---
layout: post
title: Epic 2021 day 2 conference notes
date: 2021-10-20 09:00
tags: [conference, ethnography]
permalink: /epic2021-day-two/
---

## Catching up to the Present to Reimagine the Future

_In the age of pandemics and climate crises, reality is represented via varied narratives on health, politics, and the environment across different cultural and social contexts. As artists, designers, and ethnographers practicing the art of narration within different specialties and contexts, this panel aims to showcase how creative professionals re-organize their methods, practices, relationships, and lives in the face of present circumstances. Panelists will share how art and design can help us reflect upon the present and address any future challenges._


Afra Chen
Fudan University
PHD candidate

Natascha Nanji
Independent
Artist & Writer

Rasa Smite
RIXC Art Science Center
Artist and Researcher / Co-founder

Raitis Smits
RIXC
Associated Professor

Chuma Anagbado
Aziza Design
Managing Partner/ Co-Founder


### Chuma
Artist and designer from Lagos. Work revolves around identity. Has three platforms: social enterprise, afro-centric products, cultural events.

In Africa, we had a different way to record history

His works are reminiscent of the age-old curvilinear Igbo ‘Uli Artform’ and created through a synthesis of traditional and digital techniques. This hybrid art making technique has positioned Chuma’s works to feature naturally both in print and emerging NFT art spaces.

### Rasa & Ratis

from Riga. Works with science and emerging media with a focus on sensory and perceptual aspects.  

http://smitesmits.com/

Our human stories have always been mediated and the limits of our senses have always been replaced by technology. But with pandemic and lockdown there's a need to find ways to renew our focus on sensory works and embodied experiences

eg. battery that sonifies bactierical activity in a pond; atmospheric forest - visualizing the relationship between forest and atmosphere

a lot of their work is out in the field / in nature. mainly works with the inivisible in nature 

have been working for 20 years. were pioneering internet radio artist.

### Natascha

normally in London. Writes about research, and often lesser-known figures in history. but wanted to share piece of speculative fiction

http://www.nataschananji.com/

## Designing Emergent Products and Services

_Ethnographers must use insights about the consumers of current products and services in order to anticipate future ones. In this session, researchers demonstrate how they do this such diverse contexts as immersive media, virtual primary care, and future vehicles._

*Building for the Future, Together: A Model for Bringing Emerging Products to Market, Using Anticipatory Ethnography and Mixed Methods Research*
_Stefanie Hutka, Adobe, Inc._

Defining emergent technology as bringing significant change to business industry or society, primary impact occurs in the future, and where market research products is largely undefined.

Case study on designing an AR creation app - Adobe Arrow

But most customers have never used an AR creation app.

13 participants - all creative professionals - for one on one in person research sessions.

Gave them a photo of an otherwise empty apartment, clear acrylic sheet, and markers - how would you make the ordinary seem extraordinary? 

Prompt adapted from a 2017 medium article on designing on emergent technologies.  

Kept the prompt/exercise away from the term AR or glasses or specific tech solutions.

This approach - termed anticipatory ethnography - situataes participants in a future in which the emerging technology exists to understand what they value in the future

This example illustrates how a researcher can address the challenge of helping a team anticipate how potential customers want to use an emerging product. 

But bigger challenge is how to foster more active engagement between the product team and potential customers in these situations. 

Solution was to categorise open-ended responses together, as a team. She then also coded a subset of the responses on her own as a point of reference.









